[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Any instrument or any art,
anything can be a feedback,
can be a mirror.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I think what comes closest
to playing the theremin is
singing, because it's just
your body, but singing
that's very introverted.
It's just you.
Playing the theremin, you
get the mirror from outside.
So it's a bit different.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[CHANTING]
CAROLYN EYCK: I took singing
lessons when I was young.
And at some point,
some years ago,
I discovered that
the human voice
is very close to the
sound of the theremin.
And when I would just sing
for myself, doodling around,
my friends would say,
well, you sound just
like a theremin when you sing.
And that's when
I was like, well,
how about combining
these two sounds,
maybe creating something new.
You hear this electronic sound,
something not quite human,
but then at the same
time, the voice has also
changed into something
more electronic,
so I started to experiment
with these two sounds
and combining them
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I had theremin lessons when
I was very young,
with Lydia Kavina.
She is a Russian thereminist.
My dad would practice with me.
He would be on the piano, and
I'd be playing the theremin.
I did my bachelor's
in viola playing.
And then I stopped
after an injury,
and basically, just play the
theremin and sing for 10 years
now.
The theremin is a very early
electronic musical instrument,
which was invented around
1920, by the Russian physicist
and cellist, Leon Theremin.
With all instruments, you
need to work hard, in a way,
to get a sound.
You need to touch
something, and he
was dreaming of having
an instrument, where
you are a part of the
instrument and the playing style
is effortless.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When you play the theremin, you
are a part of the instrument.
You have the theremin itself.
You have your body, and you have
the invisible space between you
and the instrument, which are
the electromagnetic fields.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Every movement is
translated into sound.
I don't feel anything
while I play.
Maybe there are people who do.
Technically, there is a tiny bit
of power going through my body,
because I'm one half
of the capacitor.
But it's so little.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I'll be showing you, today,
two different instruments,
the one which I'm
still playing, which
I got when I was
about 15, I think,
and the other one
is the instrument
I learned on when I was a kid.
So I had it since I was seven.
Each theremin has
its unique sound.
This instrument, which is
called the Big Briar 91A,
it really sounds different
from the instrument
I'm playing today.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Which has a more modern sound.
Since the theremin
is a synthesizer,
we can change between
different sounds.
For example, you
heard this sound,
which is close to a sine wave.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Not really a sine wave but the
most sine wavy sound I can get.
If I change my sound
then for example,
we can get something like this.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I can change the pitch when I go
closer to this upright antenna.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Then we have the other antenna,
which controls the volume.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When I tune the electromagnetic
field to my body,
the first thing I do is I check
how the field is behaving.
I start with a high pitch.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Go closer to my
body with my hand.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now, at some point, I'll
hear a very low note,
and then no sound at all,
which is called zero beat.
And then, there's just nothing.
What I'm trying to do
is adjust the field
so that I have the lowest note,
the zero beat, just in my body.
So I'll use the knob on the
instrument, called pitch,
and adjust it and check again.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now it's a bit
closer to my body,
and it needs a bit
more of adjustment.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And now it's much further
and closer to my body.
For me, sounds are
everywhere in space.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So if people walk by
here, they would also
influence the sounds.
We are playing the theremin
with our capacitance,
with the water in our hand.
For example, you can play
the theremin, as well,
with soap bubbles
if you want to.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
If you have a string
instrument, you
could say my left
hand is doing what
the bow hand would be doing.
So it's producing the sound.
And then on the
other side, I could
imagine that I have one
invisible string, which
is attached to the antenna and
it goes straight to my body.
And all my notes are on
that invisible string.
They are also here,
here, and here.
But in order to get
precise pitches,
I need to limit myself.
I need to focus.
And I will focus all the notes
onto one string, onto one line.
I can play, for
example, a major scale
by just opening and
closing my fingers.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And that's how simple it is.
When you play the
theremin and you
want to get certain
pitches out of it,
you need to be
very still, and you
need to be aware of your body.
I don't drink coffee, because
if I just shake slightly,
I don't have the
control over my muscles,
and you will hear
that in sounds.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
If my heart beats faster, that
will be heard in the sound.
It's kind of like
a mirror, you know?
It's a mirror of how
I feel in that moment.
If I would, let's say,
just play classical music,
I'd always have to
have that stillness.
But if I also embrace the
freedom of the instrument
and I play movement in space,
I can combine the freedom
with the focus.
And that's what I like
to do in my music.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In the past years,
I've experienced
that more and more people
know the instrument, actually.
And that's, of course,
because of the internet,
because we can produce
videos and educate people.
So I always noticed that
when I go through security
at the airport, because
then people are, yeah,
I know that from
"Big Bang Theory."
I'm like, that's right.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Practicing the theremin and
playing the theremin, for me,
is one tool to learn about
thought process and my body.
In a way, the theremin is
not just a mirror but also
a magnifying glass.
It all comes down to being
more honest and more true
with ourselves, so we can
learn about ourselves.
And if we can feel ourselves,
we can feel empathy with others
and that will solve
a lot of problems.
[MUSIC PLAYING]